---
layout: page
title: My Quantum Field Theory Tricks and Tips
description: I introduce useful prescriptions for QFT calculations (e.g., currents, stress-tensors, hamiltonians, canonical momenta) 
img: /assets/img/springmattress.jpeg
importance: 3
---

# Purpose

I usually run into QFT calculations over and over again. I'll present some short-cuts/algorithms for computing them -- I hope they can also help you 😎


# Sheet 1: Conserved current $$ j^{\mu} $$

How does the Lagrangian change under a *continuous* transformation? For example, a spacial translation of the system $$ x\mapsto x+a $$ or a field redefinition $$ \phi^a \mapsto M^{a}_b \phi^b $$ or even a mix of both.  **Noether's theorem** tells us that for any continuous symmetry of the Lagrangian which leaves the action invariant, there is an associated conserved current $$ j^\mu $$ (i.e., $$ \partial_\mu j^\mu = 0 $$). 

Here comes the prescription:

1. Identify the transformation at the infinitessimal scale
2. Calculate the associated field transformation: $$ \delta \phi $$
3. Calculate the associated Langrangian transformation: $$ \delta \mathcal{L} = \partial_\mu \mathcal{J}^\mu $$
4. Equate the two:
$$ j^\mu = \frac{\partial \mathcal{L}}{\partial(\partial_\mu \phi)} \delta \phi - \mathcal{J}^\mu $$
5. Strip out the components of the current if it is in index-free notation.

The main idea in this equation is to associate divergences to boundary terms (this should make you think of Gauss's law or any Green identity)

#### Example 1: Vector field theory $$ \phi_a $$ with $$ SO(3) $$ rotations

1. The associated transformation is: $$ \phi_a \mapsto R(\theta\hat{\eta})^{b}_a \phi_b $$
2. Expanding at small angles yields
$$ R(\theta \hat{\eta})^b_a \phi_b = \phi_a + \theta \epsilon_{abc} \eta_b \phi_c $$.
We identify
$$ \delta \phi_a = \theta \epsilon_{abc} \eta_b \phi_c $$.
3. We see that $$\delta \mathcal{L} = 0 $$ because under such a transformation the Lagrangian is completely unchanged. So $$ 
\mathcal{J}^\mu = 0 $$ since no boundary terms appear! This is obvious because the transformation is associated to **fields** and not coordinates.
4. We now construct the associated conserved current
$$ j^\mu = \frac{\partial \mathcal{L}}{\partial(\partial_\mu \phi)} \delta \phi - \mathcal{J}^\mu $$ which amounts to
$$ j^\mu = (\theta \epsilon_{abc}\eta_b \phi_c)(\partial^\mu \phi_a) = \theta(\epsilon_{abc}\partial^\mu \phi_a \phi_c)\eta_b$$
5. We can strip out components associated with the unit vector $$ \hat{\eta} $$:
$$j^\mu_a = \epsilon_{abc} \partial^\mu \phi_b \phi_c $$

What is the physical interpretation of this conserved current? Let's look at the $$ \mu = 0, a=1 $$ component:

$$j^0_1 = \epsilon_{1bc}\dot{\phi_b}\phi_c = \dot{\phi_2}\phi_3 - \dot{\phi_3}\phi_2 $$.

This reminds us of the field's angular momement in the $$a=1$$ direction. How do spatial components of this current look like?

$$j^i_1 = -(\partial_1 \phi_2) \phi_3 + (\partial_1 \phi_3) \phi_2 $$

This reminds us of a curl/torsion.  We can thus interpret the conserved current as following: **the angular momentum coming into the field results in a net spatial torsion.**

#### Example 2: Scalar field theory $$ \phi $$ with conformal symmetry

1. The associated transformations are: $$x \mapsto \lambda x, \phi(x) \mapsto \phi'(x) = \lambda^{-D}\phi(\lambda^{-1}x) $$. 
2. Expanding at small scaling ($$ \lambda = 1+\epsilon $$ ): $$\delta \phi = -\epsilon(D + x^\nu \partial_\nu)\phi $$
3. Since the action is invariant, the Lagrangian is invariant up to a total derivative. It also transforms like a scalar field with scaling dimensions: $$ \delta \mathcal{L} = -\epsilon (D + x^\mu \partial_\mu )\mathcal{L} = -\epsilon \partial_\mu(x^\mu \mathcal{L}) $$
4. Constructing the associated current: $$ j^\mu = [\partial^\mu \phi][-\epsilon(D + x^\nu \partial_\nu)\phi] - [-\epsilon x^\mu \mathcal{L}] $$

$$ j^{\mu} = \partial^\mu \phi(D + x^\nu \partial_\nu)\phi - x^\mu \mathcal{L} $$.

In this case, we cannot strip out component of the symmetry since the transformation is generated by a simple scaling.

# Sheet 2: Scattering amplitudes

We know that conservation of energy and momentum prohibits certain decays from occuring. For example, let's consider a decay of the form $$ \phi \to \psi \psi^* $$. If the scalar particle has mass $$ m $$, and the complex scalar particle has mass $$ M $$, using our basic knowledge of special relativity, we expect that a necessary condition for the decay to occur is $$ m > 2M $$. Does this result hold using our formulation of QFT?  To see this, we need to use scattering amplitudes, and in paritcular the decay rate $$ \Gamma $$. This rate is a *physical quantity*, meaning it is observed in experiments. As such, it serves a good starting point to begin an analysis with the hope that 4-momenta conservation pops out. 

At tree level, the scattering amplitude is

$$ \mathcal{M} = -ig $$

The decay rate is given by 

$$ \Gamma=\frac{g^{2}}{2 m} \int \frac{\mathrm{d}^{3} q_{1}}{(2 \pi)^{3} 2 E_{1}} \frac{\mathrm{d}^{3} q_{2}}{(2 \pi)^{3} 2 E_{2}}(2 \pi)^{4} \delta^{(4)}\left(p-q_{1}-q_{2}\right) $$, 

where we assumed WLOG that the particle is at rest.

The next step requires splitting up the delta functions into energy and momenta. Finally, we use the fact that

$$ \delta(f(x)) = \frac{1}{|f'(x)|_{a}}\delta(x-a) $$,

provided there is a single solution $$ a $$ (i.e., $$ f(a) = 0 $$.)

Indeed, the final integral is non-vanishing for $$ m > 2M $$. 

$$ \Gamma=\frac{g^{2}}{2 \pi m} \int_{\mu}^{\infty} \frac{E \sqrt{E^{2}-\mu^{2}}}{(2 E)^{2}} \delta(2 E-m) \mathrm{d} E=\frac{g^{2}}{2 \pi m} \int_{2 \mu}^{\infty} \frac{\sqrt{(x / 2)^{2}-\mu^{2}}}{4 x} \delta(x-m) \mathrm{d} x $$

In this form, we integrate over intermediate particle masses $$ x $$ until we hit single sharply peaked resonance at $$x = m$$. 