---
layout: page
title: My Quantum Field Theory Tricks and Tips
description: I introduce useful prescriptions for QFT calculations (e.g., currents, stress-tensors, hamiltonians, canonical momenta) 
img: /assets/img/springmattress.jpeg
importance: 3
---

# Purpose

I usually run into QFT calculations over and over again. I'll present some short-cuts/algorithms for computing them -- I hope they can also help you 😎


# Sheet 1: Conserved current $$ j^{\mu} $$

How does the Lagrangian change under a *continuous* transformation? For example, a spacial translation of the system $$ x\mapsto x+a $$ or a field redefinition $$ \phi^a \mapsto M^{a}_b \phi^b $$ or even a mix of both.  **Noether's theorem** tells us that for any continuous symmetry of the Lagrangian which leaves the action invariant, there is an associated conserved current $$ j^\mu $$ (i.e., $$ \partial_\mu j^\mu = 0 $$). 

Here comes the prescription:

1. Identify the transformation at the infinitessimal scale
2. Calculate the associated field transformation: $$ \delta \phi $$
3. Calculate the associated Langrangian transformation: $$ \delta \mathcal{L} = \partial_\mu \mathcal{J}^\mu $$
4. Equate the two:
$$ j^\mu = \frac{\partial \mathcal{L}}{\partial(\partial_\mu \phi)} \delta \phi - \mathcal{J}^\mu $$
5. Strip out the components of the current if it is in index-free notation.

The main idea in this equation is to associate divergences to boundary terms (this should make you think of Gauss's law or any Green identity)

#### Example 1: Vector field theory $$ \phi_a $$ with $$ SO(3) $$ rotations

1. The associated transformation is: $$ \phi_a \mapsto R(\theta\hat{\eta})^{b}_a \phi_b $$
2. Expanding at small angles yields
$$ R(\theta \hat{\eta})^b_a \phi_b = \phi_a + \theta \epsilon_{abc} \eta_b \phi_c $$.
We identify
$$ \delta \phi_a = \theta \epsilon_{abc} \eta_b \phi_c $$.
3. We see that $$\delta \mathcal{L} = 0 $$ because under such a transformation the Lagrangian is completely unchanged. So $$ 
\mathcal{J}^\mu = 0 $$ since no boundary terms appear! This is obvious because the transformation is associated to **fields** and not coordinates.
4. We now construct the associated conserved current
$$ j^\mu = \frac{\partial \mathcal{L}}{\partial(\partial_\mu \phi)} \delta \phi - \mathcal{J}^\mu $$ which amounts to
$$ j^\mu = (\theta \epsilon_{abc}\eta_b \phi_c)(\partial^\mu \phi_a) = \theta(\epsilon_{abc}\partial^\mu \phi_a \phi_c)\eta_b$$
5. We can strip out components associated with the unit vector $$ \hat{\eta} $$:
$$j^\mu_a = \epsilon_{abc} \partial^\mu \phi_b \phi_c $$

What is the physical interpretation of this conserved current? Let's look at the $$ \mu = 0, a=1 $$ component:

$$j^0_1 = \epsilon_{1bc}\dot{\phi_b}\phi_c = \dot{\phi_2}\phi_3 - \dot{\phi_3}\phi_2 $$.

This reminds us of the field's angular momement in the $$a=1$$ direction. How do spatial components of this current look like?

$$j^i_1 = -(\partial_1 \phi_2) \phi_3 + (\partial_1 \phi_3) \phi_2 $$

This reminds us of a curl/torsion.  We can thus interpret the conserved current as following: **the angular momentum coming into the field results in a net spatial torsion.**

#### Example 2: Scalar field theory $$ \phi $$ with conformal symmetry

1. The associated transformations are: $$x \mapsto \lambda x, \phi(x) \mapsto \phi'(x) = \lambda^{-D}\phi(\lambda^{-1}x) $$. 
2. Expanding at small scaling ($$ \lambda = 1+\epsilon $$ ): $$\delta \phi = -\epsilon(D + x^\nu \partial_\nu)\phi $$
3. Since the action is invariant, the Lagrangian is invariant up to a total derivative. It also transforms like a scalar field with scaling dimensions: $$ \delta \mathcal{L} = -\epsilon (D + x^\mu \partial_\mu )\mathcal{L} = -\epsilon \partial_\mu(x^\mu \mathcal{L}) $$
4. Constructing the associated current: $$ j^\mu = [\partial^\mu \phi][-\epsilon(D + x^\nu \partial_\nu)\phi] - [-\epsilon x^\mu \mathcal{L}] $$

$$ j^{\mu} = \partial^\mu \phi(D + x^\nu \partial_\nu)\phi - x^\mu \mathcal{L} $$.

In this case, we cannot strip out component of the symmetry since the transformation is generated by a simple scaling.

# Sheet 2: Baby scattering

We know that conservation of energy and momentum prohibits certain decays from occuring. For example, let's consider a decay of the form $$ \phi \to \psi \psi^* $$. If the scalar particle has mass $$ m $$, and the complex scalar particle has mass $$ M $$, using our basic knowledge of special relativity, we expect that a necessary condition for the decay to occur is $$ m > 2M $$. Does this result hold using our formulation of QFT?  To see this, we need to use scattering amplitudes, and in paritcular the decay rate $$ \Gamma $$. This rate is a *physical quantity*, meaning it is observed in experiments. As such, it serves a good starting point to begin an analysis with the hope that 4-momenta conservation pops out. 

At tree level, the scattering amplitude is

$$ \mathcal{M} = -ig $$

The decay rate is given by 

$$ \Gamma=\frac{g^{2}}{2 m} \int \frac{\mathrm{d}^{3} q_{1}}{(2 \pi)^{3} 2 E_{1}} \frac{\mathrm{d}^{3} q_{2}}{(2 \pi)^{3} 2 E_{2}}(2 \pi)^{4} \delta^{(4)}\left(p-q_{1}-q_{2}\right) $$

where we assumed WLOG that the particle is at rest.

The next step requires splitting up the delta functions into energy and momenta. Finally, we use the fact that

$$ \delta(f(x)) = \frac{1}{|f'(x)|_{a}}\delta(x-a) $$

provided there is a single solution $$ a $$ (i.e., $$ f(a) = 0 $$.)

Indeed, the final integral is non-vanishing for $$ m > 2M $$. 

$$ \Gamma=\frac{g^{2}}{2 \pi m} \int_{\mu}^{\infty} \frac{E \sqrt{E^{2}-\mu^{2}}}{(2 E)^{2}} \delta(2 E-m) \mathrm{d} E=\frac{g^{2}}{2 \pi m} \int_{2 \mu}^{\infty} \frac{\sqrt{(x / 2)^{2}-\mu^{2}}}{4 x} \delta(x-m) \mathrm{d} x $$

In this form, we integrate over intermediate particle masses $$ x $$ until we hit single sharply peaked resonance at $$x = m$$. 

# Sheet 4: Scattering

#### Example 1: Feynman rules for derivative terms

How does gauge symmetry manifests itself in scattering amplitudes?  Let's look at the QED Lagrangian to guide our intuition:

$$ \mathcal{L} = -\frac{1}{4} F_{\mu \nu}F^{\mu \nu} + \bar{\psi}\left(i D - m\right)\psi $$

where $$ D = \gamma^\mu\left(\partial_\mu + ie A_u\right) $$. The reason why we chose this derivative term $$ D $$ is because it makes Lagrangian invariant under a new gauge choice $$ A_\mu \mapsto A_\mu + \partial_\mu \alpha(x) $$ and $$ \psi \mapsto e^{ie \alpha(x)} \psi $$. However, if you expand the derivative term you will see that it is simply the sum of two free theories (E&M and Dirac) minus a coupling energy term of the form: $$ -ie \bar{\psi} \gamma^\mu \psi A_\mu $$. This current is what couples the E&M current to the Fermion fields.

What are the Feynman rules then? Well have propogators from the free theories for the photons and fermions, but this new interaction vertex:

$$ -ie \gamma_\mu (2\pi)^4 \delta^{(4)}(p_1 + p_2 + p_3) $$

Which can be read-off from the way the photon $$ A_\mu $$ couples to fermions $$ \bar{\psi} \gamma^\mu \psi $$. Note that this interaction is independent of derivatives of fields, so the associated Feynman rule is independent of momenta involved. 

Lets now consider **scalar QED** with the field $$ \phi $$ instad of the usual fermion. How do we write the $$ U(1) $$ gauge invariant action?

$$ \mathcal{L} = -\frac{1}{4} F_{\mu \nu}F^{\mu \nu} + (D_\mu \phi)^* (D^{\mu} \phi) - m^2 \phi^* \phi $$

Since the action must be invariant under $$ \phi \mapsto e^{ie \alpha(x) } \phi $$, the associated covariant derivative is:

$$ D_\mu = \partial_\mu + ie A_\mu $$, where $$ A_\mu = \partial_\mu \alpha(x) $$

It's still not clear how the associated Feynman rules appear, so let's expand the kinetic term like we did with QED

$$ (D_\mu \phi)^* (D^{\mu} \phi) = (\partial_\mu \phi)(\partial^\mu \phi^*) + ie \left[A_\mu (\partial^\mu \phi^*)\phi - A^\mu (\partial_\mu \phi) \phi^*\right] + e^2 A_\mu A^\mu \phi \phi^* $$.  We can now plug this into our Lagrangian and compare with the associated free theories:

$$ \mathcal{L} = -\frac{1}{4}F_{\mu \nu} F^{\mu \nu} + \partial_\mu \phi \partial^\mu \phi^* - m^2 \phi \phi^* - ie A_\mu\left[(\partial^\mu \phi) \phi^* -  (\partial^\mu \phi^*)\phi\right] - \left[-e^2 A_\mu A^\mu \phi \phi^*\right] $$

The first three terms is the Langriangian associated to two free theories: QED and complex scalar theory. However, the remaining terms are interaction terms! They give rise to vertices in Feynman rules. How can we deduce the associated Feynman rules? 

The first term is a photon $$ A_\mu $$coupled to a particle/anti-particle pair. These particles are travelling **into** the vertex with momenta $$ p^\mu, q^\mu$$. So the Feynman rule is $$ -ie(p-q)^\mu $$

The second term is two photons interacting with a particle/anti-particle pair. The interaction is independent of derivatives and has a symmetry factor of 2. Hence the corresponding Feynman rule is $$ 2ie^2 \eta_{\mu\nu} $$

Our Feynman rules now serve as building blocks to calculate amplitudes for non-trivial interactions such as $$ \phi \bar{\phi} \to \phi \bar{\phi} $$ at order $$e^2$$. 